[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> I am Raymond Moody.
And these are my thoughts
on shared death experiences.
Very commonly at the scene
where somebody is dying
and the family members are
assembled around the bed,
as the person in
the bed passes away,
the bystanders themselves
have experiences
that are identical
to those that are
reported to us by people
who are resuscitated
after almost dying.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For example, the
bystander may say
that as the person
in the bed dies,
they see something
leave the body.
And this is very often
described as a light,
like a globular,
grayish, golden light.
I hear this very often from
physicians, for example.
The other people
at the bedside may
say that as the individual
in the bed dies,
the bystander
themselves say that they
leave their physical bodies.
And they feel that they go
part way with their dying loved
one toward this light.
And then at a
certain point, they
come back and rejoin their body,
and their loved one goes on.
Or people may say that
as the person dies,
the light fills the room, like
this amazing bright light.
Or people will say that
they see apparitions
of the dying person's
dead relatives and friends
come into the room as though to
escort the dying person away.
And another very
common thing I hear
is that the geometry of
the room shifts in some way
that they find
impossible to describe.
I hear people say, for
example, that they suddenly
realize that they were looking
at something in the room
from an impossible angle
or that they couldn't
see the geometrical
markers in the room,
like the walls and such.
The most phenomenal and to me
threatening part of the shared
death experience-- and this
is definitely not something I
want--
is that I've heard
from a lot of people
that as the person in the bed
dies that the bystander himself
or herself empathically
participated in the dying life
review of the person
who passed away.
Now, to me, this is a
very uncomfortable thought
because I'm not
even looking forward
to my own life review,
much less the idea
that there could be a spectator
there or somebody might
want to pass the popcorn
or something, right?
So this is really horrible.
And yet, for a long
time, I thought
this has to be all
confined to people
who had some
personal relationship
with the individual.
But then a few years ago,
I got a communication
from a doctor who told me
that he was called to the ER
to resuscitate a patient
he had never laid eyes on.
And as he was
resuscitating the guy,
he said these images obviously
relating to this man's life
just was springing
up all around him.
And another neat thing about
it is that apparently it's
not embarrassing.
And this woman I
interviewed in about 1989
or '90 in Carrollton, Georgia,
is a very, very touching memory
to me.
She must have been
in her 70s, I guess.
And I remember the red hair and
the little mole on the cheek.
It's just a very,
very remarkable story
she told me about.
Her relationship
with her husband
was one that doesn't exist
much in this world anymore.
And it was what the
Greeks call "sturgay."
The way you spell
this is S-T-U-R-G-A-Y.
And it's the form of love that
develops between two people--
for example, a boy and a girl
who are raised on adjacent
farms way out in the country.
And they spend
their lives as they
grow up together as playmates.
And then they just
sort of naturally
evolve into a marriage.
And that was the
kind of marriage
that this woman and
her husband had.
And they married right
out of high school.
And they lived a couple
of doors from each other.
And he developed a particularly
rampant form of lung cancer
and died very quickly.
But she was there with
him in the hospital room.
And she said as he was dying,
this panorama of everything
he had ever done sprang up.
And she said of course
she recognized a lot of it
because she had lived it, too.
But there were other things
that she didn't know.
And one of the
interesting things--
she said there were certain
parts of her husband's life
that were blocked off by these
little translucent or panels
or something she
couldn't see through.
And she was upset about this.
But she said this review
was conducted in company
with this being of
complete compassion
that she and her husband
identified as Christ.
And she said when she was
uncomfortable about this
that it was explained to
her that this being said,
oh, that's not anything bad.
It's just that that's not the
time for you yet to know this.
She said that
during this review,
she was audibly talking
with her husband
back and forth about it.
And so what is going on here?
These are things that are
very difficult to put together
on this old model of the oxygen
deprivation to the brain,
right?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I had been studying near-death
experiences for 10 years
by the time I started
medical school.
And some of the
people I grew up with
were ahead of me
in medical school.
So by the time I entered medical
school in September of '72,
the faculty knew.
And I will say within
the first two weeks,
eight medical
professors reached out
and said, Dr. Moody, thank
you for investigating this.
About half of them
were people who had
had the experience themselves.
About the other half had heard
this from their own patients.
So fast forward.
It's about late December,
early January of my first year.
I was in the bookstore
at the medical school.
And this very nice woman
came and introduced herself
as Dr. So-and-so.
And I immediately
recognized the name
because she was a distinguished
professor of medicine.
And the faculty had
known about my work.
So she said, Dr. Moody, I've
been wanting to talk to you.
And this is so funny
to me even to this day.
She said, about some
mentation I had when
I was resuscitating my mother.
That word "mentation"
I thought was so neat.
So she guided me across
the campus to her office.
And she told me that sometime
before, she was unsuccessfully
trying to resuscitate her
mother from a cardiac arrest.
And she said that as
her mother was dying,
she said she felt
her mother dying.
Then she felt herself lift up.
And she could see her body
standing and her mother's
deceased body down below.
And she said, I was
trying to get my bearings.
And she realized
that her mother--
began to use her words--
now in spirit form
was there beside her.
And she said she saw her
mother recede into this light.
And she said she saw emerging
from that light people, some
of whom she recognized as
people that her mother had
known who had died.
But others she didn't recognize.
And she said she assumed
those were people
that her mother had known
before she herself was born.
But she said then as her
mother receded into this light,
she said it closed off
like the lens of a camera,
like that spiral motion.
And then she was standing there
beside her mother's dead body
and back in her own body.
And that was the
first one I heard.
That was in December of
'72 or January of '73.
And they're just very common.
One of the most interesting
cases of a shared death
experience came to me from
an old family practitioner
in Maine who I met
years ago who told me
that he had this elderly
woman patient who had
what we call a "cor bovinum."
And this is from long,
sustained hypertension
will cause the heart
to be sort of globular,
like the heart of a cow.
And these hearts
are very irritable.
So this woman was
in the hospital.
She kept having cardiac arrests.
And they would resuscitate her.
And so after a while, she
said to the doctors, look.
I've lived a full life.
I'm ready to go.
And that's a very
hard thing sometimes
for physicians to deal with.
So a discussion occurred.
And this woman's companion,
who had known all her life--
this other woman who
was staying there
with her in the hospital--
said, well, just back off.
And I'll do this.
And so everybody did.
The doctors and nurses
just backed off,
leaving the woman
and her companion.
And the woman said after a
while that her friend did
have another cardiac arrest.
However, when that happened, the
woman was embracing her friend.
And when the heart
stopped, she felt it.
And unconsciously, she jerked.
And of course, that would
cause the heart to stop again.
So embarrassed-- oh, I'm sorry.
I won't do it again.
So again, same scenario.
The next time, the woman
had the cardiac arrest.
And her companion
just let her go.
And then the companion told the
doctor that as her friend died,
that she herself
lifted out of her body.
And they were both going upward
on an incline in this light.
And she saw at the top all
of the friends and relatives
of the woman who were there
to meet her and to greet her.
And then the woman
who was the companion
came back and joined her body.
This woman was obviously just
overjoyed and astonished.
And as I gather from
talking with the physician,
just as with any other person
with a near-death experience,
it may sound
extraordinary to us.
But to the person
to whom it happens,
it's a very personal
and inspiring event.
So I think this woman
was inspired but also--
maybe even more so--
the doctor who heard this
experience because he
told me that it really
dramatically changed
his way of dealing
with people as well.
I just know from experience that
doctors who encounter something
like this-- it
really does change
the way you treat patients.
Because I think after you hear
a few near-death experiences,
then you get a whole different
take on your patients.
You just realize that you're
not dealing with somebody
in a time-limited framework.
In a case of resuscitation,
you are dealing apparently,
I gather, with intersecting
spheres of existence.
And that brings a sort
of responsibility.
I think a lot of
doctors who finally
learn about these near-death
experiences-- it really
does change their way
of doing medicine.
Shared death
experiences immediately
made me realize there's
something wrong with the oxygen
deprivation to the
brain scenario.
Because if the bystanders
are having the same thing,
then it's not the oxygen
deprivation to the brain.
So that was what woke me
up to the significance
of the experience within
the medical framework,
or how to talk about
it with doctors.
But in terms of how to
talk about the afterlife,
well, what I would say
is that human beings,
to my utter astonishment,
are apparently
transdimensional beings.
That is that we pretend not
just to this physical realm
of existence, but to some
other state of existence
which from this framework
we can hardly even imagine.
And so since we do, I
think it's very important
to get busy on trying
to put into some sort
of understandable words
what that experience is
of transition to another
state of existence.
The logic that we all
learned from childhood
was invented by Aristotle.
And he predicated it
on literal meaning
and the true-false distinction.
And that's a wonderful
thing because
of what has come out of logic.
However, there is a
whole domain of language
that is not meaningful but which
is nonetheless very important.
Because Dr. Seuss
and Lewis Carroll
can create language that is
very evocative and moves us
and takes us some way
to different places
but that doesn't
make a bit of sense.
Now, this is very hard
to put into simple words
because it's something
I've been working
on I guess since I was a kid.
But what I have done
is that I have worked
out the logic of nonsense.
And that sounds
self-contradictory, I know.
And we don't like
that word "nonsense,"
except we love nonsense.
People love nonsense.
But they hate the
word "nonsense."
Doo-wop music-- sha na na na
na na, sha na na na na na,
get a job.
Playground rhymes-- one bright
day in the middle of the night,
two dead boys got up to fight.
Back to back they faced each
other, drew their swords
and shot each other.
A deaf policeman heard the
noise and came and killed
those two dead boys.
So many people have
very fond memories
of that from childhood.
When I would be
talking with a patient,
very often in various
kinds of illnesses,
patients talk nonsense.
For example, if
they are intoxicated
with mercury or ethylene
gas or nitrous oxide,
they'll talk nonsensically.
Or if they are delirious,
they talk on and on.
And it's nonsense.
Or people with
schizophrenia will make up
these meaningless
words and so on.
And so what I realized was
that the nonsense that I heard
from my patients
were identically
the same types of nonsense
that Dr. Seuss and Lewis
Carroll write about, which
means that nonsense is nonsense
whether it is deliberate
or involuntary.
So in other words, nonsense
has its own structure.
And it's built into the mind.
But we have blocked it out.
But because of a
specific historical event
that took place in the life of
Aristotle, in the West in 2018,
we can't think logically
about nonsense.
And that creates a situation
where we cannot think logically
about sentences like,
there is life after death,
which is a self-contradiction.
Now, to begin at the
beginning, nonsense
is not something like
we have in our mind
as something kind of unformed
and undifferentiated.
I have identified over 70
different types of nonsense.
And I'm sure there's others.
Listen to this.
'Twas brillig, and the slithy
toves did gyre and gimble
in the wabe.
Now, obviously that's nonsense.
But now listen to this.
Holiness pursues the vestigial
lipstick of spontaneity.
That's nonsense, too.
But it's a different type.
Or listen to this.
That cannibal you
man just ate was
the last one in this county.
That's nonsense, too, but of
a different type, so much so
that now that you see this,
I could give you an unknown.
And you could fit it
into the category.
If I said, for example,
I'm not an actor,
but I played one on
television, which
pattern does that exemplify?
It's the third pattern, right?
So we can think logically about
things that don't make sense.
It just takes a while
of learning new rules
of thinking about this.
And then when we come
back after that process
to the near-death
experience, then we
can think about it
in a whole new way
such that if before you happen
to have a near-death experience
you know how to think logically
about nonsensical things,
then when you come back from
that near-death experience,
you're able to put it into
a whole different framework.
And that, for the
first time, enables us
to give a class of comparison.
We already have lots and lots
of near-death experiences
that are formulated
through the lens
of Aristotelian logic, which
makes it a travel narrative.
I think in the not
too distant future,
we'll have other accounts
of near-death experiences
that are propounded
in some other way.
And that gives us a
way of comparison.
We can compare the two cases.
So that's where my
research is now.
And it's already
had one success.
A very wonderful
scientist, an artist--
a sculptor, as matter of fact--
who took one of my
seminars years before
then developed H1N1 flu and was
in the hospital for 60 days,
lost his leg from gangrene, had
three near-death experiences
during the time.
And as he was
describing this to me,
he said-- and his voice
became very energetic.
And he said, Raymond,
while I was over there,
he said, my mind went back
to the course on nonsense.
And he said, I realized that
what you were saying is true--
that you can't comprehend
how that world is
connected to this world unless--
and this is his exact words.
It's just funny.
He said, unless you take
the unintelligible axis
into account, which is his
way of putting it, I guess,
as a physicist would.
We have to change
our logic in our mind
to really grapple with this
question of life after death.
Things that don't
make sense in one era
may make sense in a later era.
For example, go back
in your mind now
into the mind of a highly
educated person of the year
1915 and listen
to this sentence.
All four of Asdel's
grandparents perished
and were lost in a shipwreck
long before her mother
and father were born.
In 1915, it's just
unintelligible.
Add the knowledge of DNA,
cloning, of gene editing,
and so on, and now that
same sentence makes sense.
We're going through
an identical situation
with the near-death experience.
It doesn't make sense by
the standard logic we have.
But we now have
new, exciting ways
of thinking about
things that will
make the near-death experience
and the shared death experience
part of our common
human vocabulary.
Read various documents
from other cultures,
like the "Tibetan
Book of the Dead"
and on, that seem to
indicate that there
is some definite term or
time that the person hovers
around the body.
But this is not what
I've heard from patients
with near-death experiences.
Matter of fact, probably
the most common thing
that I hear from
people is that as soon
as they are out of
their body, they kind of
lose interest in it.
And they may not
even recognize it.
I've heard people say that
when they looked at the body
on the table, they had
no idea that was them
until they figured it out.
I think what this is all
about is consciousness
and these different
kind of scenarios
we're trying to play out
and how long the spirit
hangs around the body.
I don't know that these
really have answers
because what I hear from
people is that when you go over
to this other dimension,
you're totally out of the time
framework anyway.
And I just can't
imagine being connected
with this body for eternity.
I mean, please spare me that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think that shared death
experiences are very
important for several reasons.
In terms of the
theory of it, they
show that the explanation of
near-death experiences in terms
of the oxygen cutoff to
the brain is invalid.
But in terms of the people left
behind, my general sense of it
is that the people who go
through this with their dying
loved ones--
it's just a very
meaningful thing to people
to be able to
empathically participate
in that exiting of
their loved ones.
That's what I hear from people.
And these situations
that still occur
in hospitals from
time to time, sadly,
where when the patient is
dying that the family is
ushered out of the room--
that's a very sad thing
to me because it's
very inspiring to be there
at the death of a loved one.
I had a shared death
experience with my family
at the death of
my mother in 1994.
And it was very interesting
because that weekend,
I was at a seminar
where we were planning
to create a systematic
study of shared death
experiences along with a lot of
psychologists and scientists.
And it was Mother's Day of 1994.
And I called my mom
from the shopping mall
to wish her a
Happy Mother's Day.
I said, how are you doing?
And I remember the
cheerfulness of her.
Oh, I'm doing great--
very cheerful.
And then she said,
and then yesterday,
which was a Saturday, she
said, I developed this rash.
And my brothers and
sisters had taken her
to the doctor, who said
that, well, I don't think
this is anything significant.
But he gave her an appointment
to see another doctor
on the Monday, which was the
day after I talked with her.
So on Sunday,
everything was fine.
On Monday, my mom
went to the doctor.
And he said, you have
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
And you have two days
to two weeks to live.
And sure enough, two weeks later
to the day, my mother did die.
And in that process, my wife and
my sister and my brother-in-law
all experienced
something like that.
I just have no words for it.
The best I can say
is that the room
changed into this double
funnel kind of thing.
The light was different.
And there was this energy
that was swirling around,
although there was no
sensation of vertigo.
It was like a energy that was
sweeping around and around.
And I heard my mother not--
but in here very clearly
say, I love you, twice.
She had been in a coma
two days at that point.
And so oddly, the experience
that I had geared up
to study, just within a
couple of weeks after we
made that, there I
experienced it myself.
And that actually made me
drop the project because what
motivates me is curiosity.
And the fact that I
had experienced it
myself at Canada--
I lost interest in
that for a few years.
Then I came back later
and did some more of it.
But it's really startling.
I am a lover of the knowledge
process and reason and logic
and so on.
And the fact is
that people commonly
have experiences that just
don't fit into that framework
that I am so fond of.
And to me, that is not
an occasion of despair,
but rather an occasion
to expand the framework.
Let's try to expand our logical
modes of thinking so that we
can incorporate these amazing
things that happen to people
in the dying experience.
So I think that these new logics
really will help us understand
shared death experiences
and near-death experiences
and to even more deeply mine
the richness that's in 'em I
think--
that's what will
naturally happen.
[THEME MUSIC]